---
title: Why Go?
author: Mike Perham
layout: post
permalink: /2014/10/08/why-go/
categories:
  - Inspeqtor
---
When I decided to build [Inspeqtor][1], I had a fundamental choice: what language should I build it in? I&#8217;ve worked in Ruby for the last 8 years so it was a natural choice: &#8220;use the tool you know best&#8221; is never a bad choice when solving your own problem.

However I&#8217;m not building something for myself: I&#8217;m building a product that will be used by thousands of others. Since Inspeqtor is an infrastructure monitoring tool, it needs to run 24/7 efficiently and reliably. I also want everyone to be able to install and use Inspeqtor with the absolute bare minimum of hassle. This means minimizing third-party dependencies like the Ruby VM itself, gems, etc. In the end, I needed to select the right tool for the job, not just the tool I know.

Ultimately these requirements led me to two options: Go or Rust. Both can build binaries which have no runtime dependencies at all. Both are reliable and fast. Rust has a huge amount of potential but version 1.0 is still not ready yet &mdash; they&#8217;re still working out syntax details &mdash; and learning their memory ownership model has a definite learning curve. I chose Go because of its maturity and the simplicity of the language.

I want to call out two features that make Go so nice to work with:

**Easy concurrency**

Modern languages **must** have a better concurrency story than &#8220;thin wrapper around the POSIX thread API&#8221;. Go&#8217;s goroutines and channels are a simple but powerful abstraction and easier to use safely than traditional threads. Here Inspeqtor [gathers the current metrics in parallel][2] for the entities it is monitoring. I&#8217;m still trying to figure out best practices for handling errors and ensuring timeouts in goroutines. Google&#8217;s [Context][3] pattern looks like a strong contender to solve that problem.

**Full development workflow**

To paraphrase the poet John Donne: &#8220;No programming language is an island&#8221;. Go ships with tools for testing, code profiling, documentation, cross compiling and syntax formatting. There was only one thing I felt that Go should provide that it doesn&#8217;t: an assert package for test code. Here&#8217;s [some example code][4] which uses a 3rd party assert package I like. Adding if blocks here for every check would really hurt the readability of the code.

So far I&#8217;m very pleased with how well Go has worked out for Inspeqtor. I&#8217;ve been running Inspeqtor on my server for about two months now and never once has it gone over 10MB of RAM or any significant CPU usage. Here&#8217;s Inspeqtor monitoring itself:

<pre class="brush: plain; gutter: false; title: ; notranslate" title="">$ sudo inspeqtorctl status
Inspeqtor Pro 0.5.0, uptime: 54h14m14s, pid: 11645

Service: inspeqtor [Up/11645]
  cpu:system                  0.1%           
  cpu:total_system            0.0%           
  cpu:total_user              0.1%           
  cpu:user                    0.1%       90%
  memory:rss                  8.97m      10m
</pre>

Every language has strengths and weaknesses. For this purpose, Go has worked out great.

PS C and C++ were never considered. I vowed in 1997 to never manage my own memory again and not for a single day have I ever regretted that decision.

 [1]: https://github.com/mperham/inspeqtor
 [2]: https://github.com/mperham/inspeqtor/blob/master/inspeqtor.go#L241
 [3]: http://blog.golang.org/context
 [4]: https://github.com/mperham/inspeqtor/blob/master/events_test.go#L25